The major causes of World War II were numerous. They include the impact of the Treaty of Versailles following WWI, the worldwide economic depression, failure of appeasement, the rise of militarism in Germany and Japan, and the failure of the League of Nations.

Treaty of Versailles

Following World War I, the victorious Allied Powers met to decide Germany’s future. Germany was forced to sign the Treaty of Versailles.
Under this treaty, Germany had to accept guilt for the war and to pay reparations. Germany lost territory and was prohibited from having a large military.
The humiliation faced by Germany under this treaty, paved the way for the spread of Ultra-Nationalism in Germany.
Failure of the League of Nations

The League of Nations was an international organization set up in 1919 to keep world peace.
It was intended that all countries would be members and that if there were disputes between countries, they could be settled by negotiation rather than by force.
The League of Nations was a good idea, but ultimately a failure, as not all countries joined the league.
Also, the League had no army to prevent military aggression such as Italy’s invasion of Ethiopia in Africa or Japan’s invasion of Manchuria in China.
Great Depression of 1929

The worldwide economic depression of the 1930s took its toll in different ways in Europe and Asia.
In Europe, political power shifted to totalitarian and imperialist governments in several countries, including Germany, Italy, and Spain.
In Asia, a resource-starved Japan began to expand aggressively, invading China and maneuvering to control a sphere of influence in the Pacific.
Rise of Fascism

Victors’ stated aims in World War I had been “to make the world safe for democracy,” and postwar Germany was made to adopt a democratic constitution, as did most of the other states restored or created after the war.
In the 1920s, however, the wave of nationalistic, militaristic totalitarianism known by its Italian name, fascism.
It promised to minister to peoples’ wants more effectively than democracy and presented itself as the one sure defense against communism.
Benito Mussolini established the first Fascist, European dictatorship during the interwar period in Italy in 1922.
Rise of Nazism

Adolf Hitler, the Leader of the German National Socialist (Nazi) party, preached a racist brand of fascism.
Hitler promised to overturn the Versailles Treaty, restore German wealth & glory and secure additional Lebensraum (“living space”) for the German people, who he contended deserve more as members of a superior race.
In 1933 Hitler became the German Chancellor, and in a series of subsequent moves established himself as dictator.
Moreover, in 1941 the Nazi regime unleashed a war of extermination against Slavs, Jews, and other elements deemed inferior by Hitler’s ideology.
Policy of Appeasement

Hitler openly denounced the Treaty of Versailles and began secretly building up Germany’s army and weapons.
Although Britain and France knew of Hitler’s actions, they thought a stronger Germany would stop the spread of Communism from Russia.
An example of appeasement was the Munich Agreement of September 1938. In the Agreement, Britain and France allowed Germany to annex areas in Czechoslovakia where German-speakers lived.
Germany agreed not to invade the rest of Czechoslovakia or any other country. However, in March 1939, Germany broke its promise and invaded the rest of Czechoslovakia.
Even then, neither Britain nor France was prepared to take military action.
