World War II began after three years of mounting international tension, including the Spanish Civil War, Germany’s union with Austria, Hitler’s occupation of the Sudetenland, and the invasion of Czechoslovakia, which led to strained relations between the Axis and Allied powers. The German invasion of Poland on 1 September 1939 prompted Britain and France to declare war two days later, marking the official start of the war. In the early months, western Europe remained quiet in what became known as the 'Phoney War', though preparations continued and civilians evacuated. In August 1939, Hitler, determined to invade Poland, signed the German-Soviet Nonaggression Pact to avoid Soviet resistance. Following this, both Germany and the Soviet Union invaded Poland and divided the country. In 1940, the 'Winter War' between Russia and Finland ended in March, and in April, Germany invaded Denmark and Norway, with Denmark surrendering immediately and Norway falling by June. Germany then turned westward, invading France, Belgium, and Holland using a new tactic called Blitzkrieg, a fast and coordinated assault combining land and air power. Despite larger Allied forces, Germany’s strategy proved devastating, leading to France’s surrender and the formation of the Vichy government. Hitler then targeted Britain in the Battle of Britain (July–September 1940), the first all-air conflict. Although heavily bombarded, the Royal Air Force managed to repel the German assault, delaying invasion plans indefinitely.

As Nazi control spread over Europe, the war expanded globally in 1941. After Mussolini’s defeats in Greece and Tobruk, German troops moved into North Africa and invaded Greece and Yugoslavia. In June, Hitler violated the Ribbentrop Pact by launching Operation Barbarossa against the Soviet Union. Initially successful, the invasion was stalled by the harsh winter and Soviet counterattacks. Meanwhile, on 7 December 1941, Japan, frustrated by U.S. trade embargoes, attacked Pearl Harbor, leading the U.S. to enter the war. Germany soon declared war on the U.S., and Japan launched simultaneous invasions of the Philippines, Burma, and Hong Kong. At the Battle of Midway in 1942, U.S. forces destroyed four Japanese carriers, turning the tide in the Pacific. The same year, the Allies learned of the mass murder of Jews by the Nazis, and the U.S. vowed justice. In the latter half of 1942, British forces took the initiative in North Africa, while the Soviets pushed back at Stalingrad. In February 1943, Germany suffered its first major defeat, surrendering at Stalingrad. Axis forces in North Africa also surrendered, and Soviet advances continued, recapturing Kharkiv and Kiev. Allied bombing raids intensified, targeting German cities. Soviet forces reached Berlin on 21 April 1945. Hitler committed suicide on 30 April, shortly after Mussolini was executed. Germany surrendered on 7 May, and the following day was celebrated as VE Day.

With Germany defeated, plans for invading Japan were underway. However, to avoid heavy casualties, U.S. President Harry Truman approved the use of atomic bombs, developed since 1942. On 6 August 1945, Hiroshima was bombed, followed by Nagasaki on 9 August. Unable to withstand the devastation, Japan surrendered on 14 August. With this, World War II came to an end.








